                                     ROBIN GERSTER
                                 A Bellyful of Bali:
   Travel, Writing and Australia/Asia Relationships
W
             HEN in the late thirteenth century the peripatetic Venetian Marco Polo
             complained about the heat in India, he began a long tradition of Western
             tourists whingeing about Asia. Polo could be the most equable and tolerant
of globetrotters, but southern India must have affected his mind. The sun in the
southern coastal region of Quilon, he assures his readers, is so intensely powerful that
'if you put an egg into one of the rivers you would not have long to wait before it
boiled' (287). Centuries later, the heat - dryly catastrophised as the 'Hot Weather'
- was the principal bugbear of the British in India. Sahibs and memsahibs in novels
from Forster's A Passage to India (1924) to Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's Heat and Dust
(1975) revile it obsessively. The heat of the Indian sun in these novels is a gauge of
more than mere temperature; it provides a metaphor, in the finest romantic traditions
of the Purple East, for the simmering human passions generated in the Oriental context.
The notorious 'rape' in A Passage to India is presaged when Adela Quested experiences
a frisson of frustration at the disappointingly humdrum Indian sunrise, viewed from
the train as she travels toward the Marabar Caves and her imagined encounter with
the attractive Dr Aziz. With sly suggestion, Forster addresses both the personal
particulars of the unhappily affianced Adela's situation and the psychology of the
British imperial traveller in India:
       Colour throbbed and mounted behind a pattern of trees, grew in intensity, was yet brighter,
      incredibly brighter, strained from without against the globe of the air ... But at the supreme
       moment, when night should have died and day lived, nothing occurred ... Why, when the
      chamber was prepared, did the bridegroom not enter with trumpets and shawms, as humanity
      expects? The sun rose without splendour. (136-37)
   Anticlimax of a different but not unrelated kind marks the responses of many
contemporary Australian literary travellers to Asia. Marriage with <U+FF7E><U+FF73><U+FF69><U+FF61>£Ç£À           has for twenty
and more years been held up to Australians as a promise and an aspiration, as the
national future. But the honeymoon is over. Critics of the 'Asianisation' of the country
are cropping up in numbers, disdaining intimate ties with the region with the vehemence
of disenchanted lovers. And while since the late 1960s the Asian journey has been
naturalised as one of life's essential adventures, just as young Australians once felt
compelled to make the long haul to Britain, more and more literary visits to the region
produce the finding that Asia needs redefining in Australian eyes. Increasingly, the
inflated estimation of Eastern societies in the late twentieth century is being seen to
be as specious as the demonisation of the 'yellow hordes' of a century before.
Enthusiasm is being replaced by a neocolonial anxiety and distaste. The warm embrace
is turning into a new form of the old cold shoulder.
   The island of Bali, saddled with its oxymoronic reputation as a 'tourist paradise',
has borne much of the Australian backlash against Asia. Lamenting Bali is of course
hardly new. In his definitive descriptive account Island of Bali (1937) the Mexican
                                               353

